{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2709
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red25\green25\blue25;\red11\green97\blue205;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c12941\c12941\c12941;\cssrgb\c0\c47059\c84314;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww20680\viewh23180\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs28 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
24-Sep-2024\uc0\u8232 \u8232 Dear Dr. \u346 liwi\u324 ska-Wilczewska:\u8232 \u8232 \u8232 Manuscript ID cjb-2024-0082 entitled "Coastal picocyanobacteria can exploit low oxygen habitats" which you submitted to Botany, has completed the peer review process.\u8232 \u8232 Based on the reviews and the comments of the Associate Editor, as well as my own assessment of your submission, your manuscript has been conditionally recommended for publication in Botany pending Major revisions.\'a0\u8232 \u8232 \u8232 Appended below are Editor and Reviewer Comments. Your revised manuscript should be submitted by the date below.\u8232 \u8232 Due Date for Revisions: 24-Oct-2024. \'a0(To add this due date to your Outlook or Google calendar, please open the attachment and click Save.)\u8232 \u8232 AUTHOR'S RESPONSE TO REVIEWERS\u8232 Revisions must include a response document: state each editor and reviewer comment (including line number) followed by the author\'92s response.\u8232 Upload or paste the response document in Step 1 of the online submission.\u8232 \u8232 MARKED MANUSCRIPT\u8232 Revisions must include a MARKED MANUSCRIPT with track changes, highlights, coloured text etc. (do not show deletions).\u8232 If desired also upload a CLEAN MANUSCRIPT. Select the file designation: Manuscript Text.\u8232 \u8232 TO CREATE YOUR REVISION NUMBER\u8232 You can create a draft of your revision now and then enter your revised files when you have completed them by clicking here:\u8232 *** PLEASE NOTE: This is a two-step process. After clicking on the link, you will be directed to a webpage to confirm. ***\u8232 \u8232 {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://mc06.manuscriptcentral.com/botany-pubs?URL_MASK=53b22f98a1834064babdc5e9d47db9ca"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \ul \ulc3 https://mc06.manuscriptcentral.com/botany-pubs?URL_MASK=53b22f98a1834064babdc5e9d47db9ca}}\uc0\u8232 \u8232 \u8232 Once again, thank you for submitting your manuscript to \'a0Botany and I look forward to receiving your revision.\u8232 \u8232 If you do not plan to revise and resubmit this paper to Botany, please inform the editorial office ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:botany@cdnsciencepub.com"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \ul \ulc3 botany@cdnsciencepub.com}}) as soon as possible, so that we can withdraw the paper. Note that before you submit the paper to another journal, you must withdraw it or receive a final reject decision from us.\uc0\u8232 \u8232 Sincerely,\u8232 \u8232 Dr. Liette Vasseur\u8232 Editor, Botany\u8232 \u8232 --- We understand that on occasion more time may be needed to complete your tasks. If you need more time to complete a manuscript task, or need to recuse yourself, please contact the editorial office. Best wishes on behalf of the journal team. ---\u8232 \u8232 \u8232 ASSOCIATE EDITOR'S COMMENTS to Authors (if applicable):\u8232 Dear Dr. \u346 liwi\u324 ska-Wilczewska,\u8232 \u8232 The reviewers appreciated the quality of the work you accomplished and made some suggestions for improvement. Please address their comments to the fullest extent possible in your revised manuscript.\u8232 \u8232 Sincerely,\u8232 \u8232 Steeve Pepin\u8232 \u8232 \u8232 REVIEWER(S)' COMMENTS to Authors:\u8232 \u8232 NOTE: If Reviewer File Attachments are not appended, they may be found in your Author Dashboard.\u8232 Click on "Manuscripts With Decisions". Click on \'93View Decision Letter\'94. \'a0\u8232 Reviewer File attachments are located at the bottom of the screen.\u8232 \u8232 Reviewer: 1\u8232 \u8232 Comments to the author\u8232 General Comments\u8232 The manuscript titled \'93 Coastal picocyanobacteria can exploit low oxygen habitats\'94 by \u346 liwi\u324 ska-Wilczewska an Coauthors reports the results of a rigorously conducted laboratory experiment with growth measurements of two Synechococcus strains, isolated from the Baltic Sea, with different accessory pigments. The hypothesis behind the experiment is that different oxygen concentrations may affect, as do different light conditions and other parameters the photosynthetic characteristics and ultimately the growth of the two Synechococcus strains.\u8232 Indeed, the results show a difference between the two strains with Syn PE growing better at low oxygen concentrations than Syn PC. As I said above, the experiment is well designed and the methods very detailed, however I noticed that little is said about the selected strains.\
\
\
 It would have been useful to study the sequences (most likely available) to know more about the genes that determine the different pigment composition. Especially for marine strains, there are different types of phycoerythrins and the pigment composition of the strains used could give interesting information on the results and explain some controversial findings.\uc0\u8232 \
We agree, and await the genomic sequencing of these strains for the relevant comparisons.\
\
It seems to me that from an experiment with two Synechococcus strains, it is a bit excessive to come to general conclusions in the environment. I think both the title and the conclusions should be changed and referred more on the results of the experiment. A hypothesis can certainly be made, but very carefully and with caution about what can happen in the oceans or in fresh water.\uc0\u8232 \
Thank you.  We chose a more specific title:\
""Coastal *Synechococcus* strains can exploit low oxygen habitats""\
We revised the paragraphs lines XXX-XXX and YYY-YYY  to soften the generalities of the interpretations and focus attention on the strains we studied.\
\
In the introduction I would also add literature on lake environments or experiments done with freshwater Syn strains on which a lot of work has been done. Please add more references also on pigment compositions of Syn.\uc0\u8232 Line 58. Add:Dor\'e9, H.; Farrant, G.K.; Guyet, U.; Haguait, J.; Humily, F.; Ratin, M.; Pitt, F.D.; Ostrowski, M.; Six, C.; Brillet-Gu\'e9guen, L.; et al. Evolutionary mechanisms of long-term genome diversification associated with niche partitioning in marine picocyanobacteria. Front. Microbiol. 2020, 11, 2129.\u8232 Line 60-61. Add: Sanchez-Baracaldo, P.; Bianchini, G.; Di Cesare, A.; Callieri, C.; Chrismas, N.A. Insights into the evolution of picocyanobacteria and phycoerythrin genes (mpeBA and cpeBA). Front. Microbiol. 2019, 10, 45.\u8232 Line 63.\'a0 Add: Callieri, C., Cronberg, G., and Stockner, J. G. (2012) Fresh- water picocyanobacteria: single cells, microcolonies and colonial forms . In Ecology of Cyanobacteria II, Whitton, B. A. (ed). New York, NY: Springer, pp. 229\'96269.\u8232 Voros et al 1998 Hydrobiologia 370.\u8232 \
Thank you; we have added ZZZ.\
Sylwia add to Zotero and update.\uc0\u8232 \u8232 Reviewer: 2\u8232 \u8232 Comments to the author\
This manuscript presents highly valuable results, obtained by state-of-the-art methods and techniques, demonstrating the importance of light quality on the sensitivity of two Synechococcus phenotypes to O2. It appears that for growth wavelengths from 470 to 660 nm, low 02 concentration (2,5 mM), compared to 250 mM 02, has no detrimental effect on growth of both PC- and PE-rich phenotypes, and is even beneficial for the PE-rich one. In other words, high (normal?) 02 concentration is detrimental for PE-enriched, which may explain its restriction to lower light and lower O2 niches.\'a0 The expansion of OMZ with global warming may therefore benefit this phenotype in the future.\uc0\u8232 \
I have only significant comment. As mentioned above, the photophysiological measurements of the two phenotypes grown under different wavelengths and 02 concentration are impressive. However, they don\'92t fully explain the difference between the two strains. It is confusing to read that \'93In spite of \'85superior electron performance under 250 mM 02, the PE-rich strain grew faster under 2.5 mM 02\'85\'94 (li. 486-488, also li. 18 of the abstract).\'a0 I think that it is more \'93because\'94 than \'93in spite of\'94. Higher electron flow to O2 may overwhelm the capacity of the ROS scavenging, thereby increasing photoinhibition and decreasing growth. This interpretation was made to explain the lower growth rates observed in the blue region (li.427-428) \'96 besides a direct effect of blue light on OEC-, and it can apply also for PE-rich strain at high O2 under different wavelengths. I think that it may be reasonable to suggest, at least discuss the possibility, that the PE-rich strain has a lower ROS scavenging capacity than PC-rich strain. A future study could test this hypothesis by correlating oxidative damage and slower growth under high O2.\uc0\u8232 \
We thank the reviewer for this insightful comment; indeed, more electrons are not necessarily better!\
We added a line:\
"...In spite of this faster electron transport performance under 250 \'b5M [O~2~] the PE-rich strain grew faster under 2.5 \'b5M [O~2~], showing an increase in the growth return upon electron transport, possibly because of a decreased metabolic burden through suppression of ROS formation under lower [O~2~]..."\
 to the paragraph to make this point, and added an acknowledgement of the anomymous reviewer for the helpful insight.\
We await the genomic sequences of the strains to compare their capacities for ROS metabolism, and potential future  analyses of cumulative ROS toxicity.\
A comment of secondary importance would be, in line 476-478, to better explain why sPSII under 535 and 590 nm rose to a peak\'85 reflecting the state transition. If I am correct, sPSII should decrease at moderate and high light due to state transition, redirecting light excitation from PSII to PSI.\
Thank you for the comment we edited paragraph AAA to add this thought.\
\
\uc0\u8232 Also, see line 98 for silicone x2.\
Thank you, we made the correction.\
<mime-attachment.ics>\
<Author Due Date Botany.ics>\
<Comments_GS_cjb-2024-0082.pdf>}